# aps-2017
Data and Code for APS 2017 Poster

# Abstract
Using generalized linear mixed modeling, Major League Baseball home plate umpires’ ball/strike decisions were measured over the course of an entire season.  Emphasis was placed on accounting for the effects of pitch location and ball/strike count on umpires' judgment and decision making accuracy.

# Summary
In baseball, home plate umpires' perceptual-cognitive skills are tested with each pitch as they are required to judge, with accuracy, whether the ball passed through the imaginary region above home plate known as the strike zone.  Home plate umpires must visually track the flight of a pitched ball as it leaves the pitcher's hand and travels over the home plate region to accurately determine whether a pitch should be called a strike or a ball. When making decisions, expert umpires appear to demonstrate an ability to utilize knowledge of situational probabilities when making decisions.  For example, several authors have examined the visual search behavior of expert and near-expert baseball umpires, noting differences in quiet eye gaze behavior.  As pitchers released the ball, the quiet eye gaze of expert umpires occurred earlier and was longer in duration, compared to near-expert umpires.  This suggests that expert umpires appear to demonstrate an ability to gather more information about a pitch and its eventual location while tracking the ball, thus improving decision accuracy.  

This study applied literature related to judgment and decision making among expert sport performers to the professional baseball umpire population.  Using generalized linear mixed modeling with secondary data generated by the PITCHf/x pitch tracking system, umpires' ball/strike decisions were measured over the course of an entire season.  Emphasis was placed on accounting for the effects of pitch location and ball/strike count on umpires' accuracy in making ball/strike decisions.  Over the course of an entire MLB season, umpires are responsible for deciding the outcome of approximately 149 pitches per game, on average.  Home plate umpire accuracy rates ranged from 90% to 95%.

To test for the effects of pitch location and ball/strike count on the probability of umpires' accuracy in judging pitch outcomes, a multilevel model with interactions between fixed and random effects was estimated.  Less than 1% of variability observed in pitch outcomes can be attributed to home plate umpires. However, we notice variability within umpires’ decisions when pitches are located in certain regions of the strike zone. For example, predicted probabilities of accurate umpire decisions for pitches located in the inner region of the strike zone appear to be noticeably lower compared to predicted probabilities of accurate umpire decisions for pitches located in the middle or outer regions.

One explanation for this tendency is related to the location in which an umpire positions himself when viewing pitches.  Previous studies have found that when umpires are repositioned from viewing pitches from the vantage point of the inner region to viewing pitches from the vantage point of the outer region, their accuracy rates are improved.
